arXiv:2606.03954v1 [cs.CV] 2 Jun 2026  VLESA: Vision-Language Embodied Safety Agent for
                                                       Human Activity Monitoring

                                               Hanjiang Hu1,2,∗ Yiyuan Pan1,∗ Jiaxing Li1 Xusheng Luo1 Alexander Robey1
                                                                           Na Li3 Yebin Wang2 Changliu Liu1

                                         1Carnegie Mellon University 2Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories 3Harvard University
                                                           ∗ equal contribution {hanjianh,yiyuanp}@andrew.cmu.edu

                                                 Abstract: As AI systems increasingly assist humans in physical tasks, ensur-
                                                 ing safety becomes paramount—physical actions carry immediate and irreversible
                                                 consequences that digital errors do not. We introduce the Vision-Language Em-
                                                 bodied Safety Agent (VLESA), a framework that monitors human activities from
                                                 egocentric video and triggers real-time safety interventions when dangerous ac-
                                                 tions are predicted. VLESA addresses intent-dependent safety where identical
                                                 actions can be safe or dangerous depending on context. A dataset pairing ego-
                                                 centric frames with goal-conditioned safety annotations is introduced, enabling
                                                 a goal-conditioned safety Q-filter trained via GRPO that evaluates actions with
                                                 respect to inferred intent without retraining. On top of that, an intent-action
                                                 prediction agent is proposed to jointly infer goals and predict future actions
                                                 from video. On the ASIMOV-2.0 benchmark, VLESA achieves higher inter-
                                                 vention accuracy at the exact ground-truth frame compared to baselines, while
                                                 the GRPO-trained Q-filter improves action safety by over 41 percentage points
                                                 through goal-conditioned constrained decoding. Code is available at https:
                                                 //github.com/HanjiangHu/VLESA.

                                                 Keywords: Embodied AI Safety, Safe Q-Function, VLMs

                                       1 Introduction

                                       AI assistants are entering physical domains (e.g., smart glasses guiding warehouse workers, robots
                                       collaborating in manufacturing, virtual instructors for maintenance) where mistakes carry immedi-
                                       ate, often irreversible consequences [1, 2]. Recent benchmarks such as ASIMOV-2.0 reveal a stark
                                       gap: state-of-the-art multimodal models that handle text-based safety reasoning degrade sharply
                                       when asked to recognize hazards, reason about consequences, and trigger interventions from video
                                       streams [2]. On ASIMOV-2.0-Video, GPT-5 achieves only ∼8% accurate interventions and even
                                       the best evaluated model only ∼56%, and critically, all evaluated systems assess safety without
                                       conditioning on inferred intent [2].

                                       Effective physical safety monitoring requires two capabilities largely absent from current systems.
                                       First, it must be proactive: anticipating future actions from streaming egocentric video, where long-
                                       horizon understanding remains challenging despite progress in large-scale datasets and structured
                                       representations [3, 1, 4]. Second, it must be intent-dependent: the same action (e.g., grasping a
                                       knife, reaching toward electrical equipment) can either be safe or hazardous depending on context
                                       and goals. This coupling is central to emerging semantic robot safety research, where safety is
                                       governed by context-sensitive “robot constitutions” rather than fixed low-level constraints [5].

                                       Existing approaches fall short on one or both requirements. Classical dynamical safety tools such
                                       as Control Barrier Functions and Hamilton-Jacobi reachability [6, 7, 8, 9] offer formal guarantees
                                       but require explicit dynamics unavailable for human activities in video. Recent learned safety filters
                                       operate world-model latent spaces [10, 11, 12, 13] or use LLMs/VLMs to verify generative poli-
                                       cies [14, 15, 16], yet all presuppose a safety specification fixed before deployment, in the form of
                      Vision-Language Model             Graph-aware Action Generation      GRPO-trained VLM
                       ( Llama-4-Scout)                                                     ( Qwen3-VL)
Video Keyframes I$:&
                                Inferred Goal 𝑔                                                            Constraint
                                                                                                            Decoding
                              … attempting to plug an                                  𝑎! 𝑠!
                              electrical device into a                                 𝑎" 𝑠" Safe
                              burnt outlet in …
                                                                                                                  Action
                                                                                       𝑎# 𝑠# Safety 𝑎!

                                                                                                      Score

                      Vision-Language Model             Graph-aware Action Generation  GRPO-trained VLM
                       ( Llama-4-Scout)                                                 ( Qwen3-VL)

                           Inferred Goal 𝑔 Check                                              Constraint

                      … to smooth and shaping a                                        𝑎! 𝑠!  Decoding
                      wooden plank using a table
Video Keyframes I$:#  saw…                                                             𝑎" 𝑠"           Safe
                                                                                                     Action
                                                                                       𝑎# 𝑠# Safety 𝑎"
Frozen  Fine-tuned                                                                            Score

Figure 1: Given streaming egocentric video, the intent–action prediction agent infers the task goal
and predicts candidate future actions. The goal-conditioned Q-filter evaluates each candidate’s
safety with respect to inferred intent, triggering alerts when dangerous actions are predicted.

a labeled failure classifier, a constraint image, an externally given task, or the policy’s own self-
reported plan. Plug-and-play safety layers and constrained learning for vision-language-action poli-
cies [17, 18] similarly assume the actor’s goal is known. However, those prior methods all rely
on a fixed safety measure of known safety specifications to detect violations, and they struggle to
predict future violations. Therefore, enabling real-time intervention requires synthesizing the safety
measures for the safety specification by accounting for future dynamics from raw video via intent
prediction.

To this end, we propose VLESA, the Vision-Language Embodied Safety Agent, a framework for
real-time, intent-dependent safety intervention from egocentric video. VLESA decomposes safety
monitoring into (i) an intent–action prediction module that infers latent task goals and forecasts
candidate future actions from streaming observations, and (ii) a goal-conditioned safety Q-filter that
evaluates each candidate under the inferred intent, sourcing the constraint from video-inferred intent
rather than a pre-specified failure set. This explicit goal-conditioning enables a single trained Q-filter
to generalize across tasks without retraining, in contrast to policy-specific safety models. We train
the Q-filter via Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [19] on goal-conditioned supervision
derived from robot constitutions [5]. Our contributions are:

• We propose VLESA, a framework for real-time, intent-dependent safety monitoring from egocen-
  tric video. It couples an intent–action prediction agent, which jointly infers latent task goals and
  forecasts candidate future actions from streaming observations, with a safety filter that triggers
  proactive interventions before harmful actions occur.

• We introduce a versatile goal-conditioned safety Q-filter, trained via GRPO, that evaluates each
  predicted action under the inferred intent and accepts goals from multiple sources (video-inferred,
  user-specified, or externally provided), so a single model can generalize across tasks without re-
  training.

• We construct EgoSafety, a new dataset pairing egocentric frames with goal-conditioned safety
  annotations derived from robot constitutions. Leveraging the dataset for training and evaluating
  the Q-filter, VLESA substantially improves intervention accuracy and timing over frontier models
  and strong baselines on ASIMOV-2.0-Video.

2 Problem Formulation

We formalize real-time safety monitoring of humans from egocentric video, where the system, given
only visual observations, must jointly infer intent, predict future actions, and evaluate safety.

                                                           2
(a) Build EgoSafety Dataset            (b) Train Safety 𝑄-Filter           (c) Real-Time Inference

                                       EgoSafety Dataset

Ego4D Frames                                     VQA              Testing      Video I":$
                                            Formulation
 Safe              VLM                 VLM                                     Goal-Action   Q-Filter
Action             ( )                 ( )      GRPO                            Predictor
                                            Optimization

Safe Robot         Unsafe      Unsafe  Q-Filter: 𝑄!(𝐼, 𝑎, 𝑔)                𝑔 𝑎% 𝑎& 𝑎' 𝑎(
Data Constitution  Action      Data
                                                                           Goal Action List

EgoSafety: (𝐼, 𝑎, 𝑔, 𝑦) Pairs                  Safe Action: 𝑎$∗ + Alert Level  Constraint Decoding

Figure 2: Pipeline details. (Left) EgoSafety dataset construction; (Middle) Q-filter GRPO training;
(Right) Intent–action inference with constrained decoding.

Observations and Actions. At each timestep t, the system observes an egocentric image It ∈
Ispace. Unlike standard robot control formulations where the goal is provided as input, here task
goal g ∈ Gspace is latent: inferable only from the observation sequence I1:t. We factor the joint
inference of goal and next action as

                   P (gˆ, at+1 | I1:t) = P (gˆ | I1:t) · P (at+1 | I1:t, gˆ),                          (1)

exposing the inferred goal gˆ as an explicit conditioning variable for downstream safety evaluation:

the same candidate action can be safe or hazardous depending on gˆ. Each actions is represented as
n scene graph triplets aG = {(si, pi, oi)}ni=1 from constrained vocabularies derived from egocentric
action datasets [4], with a natural-language form a ∈ Aspace derived via deterministic grammatical

rules for VLM-based evaluation (details in Appendix A).

Goal-Conditioned Safety. We specify safety via a robot constitution R = {r1, . . . , rM } of M
natural language rules covering harm prevention, hazard awareness, and context-appropriate conduct
[5]; the full set is in Appendix A. The goal-conditioned safety indicator

        Safe(I, a, g) = I [∀r ∈ R : ¬Violates(I, a, g, r)] ∈ {0, 1}                                    (2)

captures that identical actions can be safe or unsafe depending on intent: grasping a knife is appro-
priate when preparing food, but dangerous when inferred goals suggest threatening behavior.

Safety Q-Function. Following Q-based safety filters from control [20, 21], we define a parame-
terized Q-function Qϕ : Ispace × Aspace × Gspace → R with the convention

                   Qϕ(I, a, g) < 0 =⇒ Safe(I, a, g) = 1,                                               (3)

mirroring Control Barrier Functions, where the zero level set forms the safety boundary and provides
a scalar summary suitable for constrained decoding. Unlike traditional value functions Qπ(s, a) tied

to a fixed policy and task, the explicit goal input decouples safety evaluation from any particular
task distribution: the same trained Qϕ pairs with arbitrary intent inference systems—video-inferred,
user-specified, or externally provided—without modification. The technical challenges are then (1)
constructing training data with goal-conditioned safety labels, (2) training Qϕ to discriminate safe
from unsafe actions across diverse goals, and (3) integrating Qϕ with intent–action prediction for
real-time monitoring—addressed next.

3 Method

VLESA consists of three components (Figure 1, 2): the EgoSafety dataset for training, a safety Q-
filter trained via GRPO, and an intent–action prediction agent that performs constrained decoding
for real-time harmfulness detection.

                                            3
3.1 EgoSafety Dataset

Training a goal-conditioned safety filter requires paired safe/unsafe action examples grounded in
realistic visual contexts, yet naturally occurring unsafe actions are rare in human demonstration
data. We therefore construct EgoSafety, a dataset of tuples (I, a, g, y)—an egocentric frame I,
a candidate action a, a task goal g, and a label y ∈ {SAFE, UNSAFE}—that supervise the safety
Q-filter in Section 3.2.

Source Data and Graph Representation. We build on Ego4D [3] with Egocentric Action Scene

Graph (EASG) annotations [4], which ground pre-action frames to the action representation of scene

graphs  aG  =  {(s  i  ,  pi  ,  oi  )}  n    of  subject(si)–predicate(pi)–object(oi)  triplets;  each  graph  is  con-
                                         i=1

verted to a natural-language sentence a by deterministic grammar rules for VLM-based evalua-

tion (full schema, symbols, and vocabularies in Appendix A. Graph-based unsafe action generation

rather than unsafe video prediction roll-out is what makes data generation scalable: because safety

is judged from a single frame and its symbolic description, we never roll out the video dynamics of

an unsafe action. Constructing an unsafe graph-based action thus reduces to a localized triplet edits,

recasting expensive unsafe data generation from explicit trajectory rollout into a visual question-

answering (VQA) problem in Section 3.2.

Data Generation with Safety Labels. For the safe data with a tuple (I, a, g, y = SAFE), the ego-
centric frame I and action a for a task goal g is directly from the pre-action frame with action and
scene summarization based on [4]. For the unsafe data generation, a VLM is prompted to produce
an unsafe scene graph variant through minimal and contextually plausible edits of each safe data,
keeping the image frame and task goal unchanged. The safety criteria are specified by the robot
constitution [5], covering harm prevention, hazard awareness, contamination avoidance, communi-
cation, and resource management. Full prompts and validation procedures are in Appendix A.

3.2 Safety Q-Filter via GRPO

We fine-tune a VLM on EgoSafety as a visual question-answering task: given image I, goal g, and
action sentence a, the model outputs y ∈ {“Safe”, “Unsafe”} with reasoning. We train with Group
Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [19, 22], where the prompt input x includes image I, task
goal g and action sentence a converted from graph-based representation aG, while the response is
expected to include the safety label y as verifiable reward.

GRPO Objective. For each prompt x with ground-truth y∗, GRPO samples a group of G re-

sponses {y1, . . . , yG}, assigns binary rewards r(yi) = +1 if yi = y∗ and −1 otherwise, and com-

putes  group-centered     advantages          A(yi)  =  r(yi)  −  1  j=1 G r(yj) to reduce variance. The objective
                                                                  G

                          LGRPO(ϕ) = Ex, y∼πϕ(·|x) [clip(A(y))] − β · DKL(πϕ∥πref)                                  (4)

uses the same clipped importance-sampled surrogate as PPO; πref is the pretrained VLM and β
weights the KL penalty preventing drift from pretrained knowledge.

From Classification to Q-Values. For constrained decoding, we convert outputs to Q-values:

                           Qϕ(I, a, g) = −1 arg maxy πϕ(y|x) = “Safe” (5)
                                               +1 arg maxy πϕ(y|x) = “Unsafe”

satisfying Equation 3. Crucially, the explicit goal input g at inference decouples the filter from any
particular task distribution, allowing the same Qϕ to detect context-malicious actions—those benign
under one goal but harmful under another.

3.3 Intent–Action Prediction with Constrained Decoding

To monitor actors whose intent is unknown, we introduce a video reasoning agent that jointly infers
the task goal and predicts future actions from streaming video. Beyond triggering alerts, the con-

                                                               4
strained decoding can also output a safe action as guidance for downstream assistants. Streaming
interface, alert thresholds, and latency analysis are in Appendix B.

Given frames {I1, . . . , It}, we select N representative keyframes (strategies in Appendix B) and
pass them to a multimodal VLM that outputs under EASG vocabulary constraints with explicit
temporal ordering. The model returns an inferred goal gˆ (with confidence and supporting visual
evidence), plus K candidate next actions as scene graph triplets, ranked k = 1, . . . , K, as scene-
graph triplets converted to natural language. Each candidate is scored by the Q-filter under the
inferred goal, sk = Qϕ(It, ak, gˆ), and combined with VLM ranking as Score(ak) = (1 − k/K) +
α · (−sk), where α weights safety. Let S := {ak : sk < τ } denote the set of candidates deemed
safe under threshold τ . The selected action and alert then followed as:

a∗ = arg maxak∈S Score(ak), S̸ = ∅ (alert: safe), (6)
arg mink sk,     S = ∅ (alert: danger).

We set τ = 0, the safe/unsafe boundary of the Q-filter. When at least one candidate is safe (S̸ = ∅),
the system returns the highest-scoring action among them; otherwise, it falls back to the safest
available candidate and raises a danger alert.

4 Experiments

We design experiments to answer two questions regarding real-time intervention and safety filter-
ing effectiveness: 1) Can VLESA accurately trigger safety interventions from streaming video, and
how does it compare to both frontier foundation models and a prompt-based safety-filter baseline?
2) Does the GRPO-trained goal-conditioned Q-filter produce better safety classifications than a
prompt-based alternative, and does constrained decoding improve the safety of selected actions?
Prior to that, we first introduce the experimental setup.

4.1 Experimental Setup

Evaluation Benchmarks. We evaluate on two complementary benchmarks. (1) ASIMOV-2.0-
Video [2] contains 287 photorealistic videos (5–10 s each) generated with VEO3, capturing tran-
sitions from safe to unsafe states. Each video is grounded in real-world injury narratives from
the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS) and annotated by 5 human raters with
ground-truth intervention timestamps. Following the official protocol (60% consensus threshold,
σ < 1.0 s), we obtain 189 videos with valid intervention labels. (2) EgoSafety is a balanced binary
classification dataset of egocentric video frames paired with task summaries and candidate actions,
each labeled Safe or Unsafe. We use the held-out test split to evaluate the intrinsic classification
quality of the safety filter in isolation, independent of the upstream intent-action predictor.

Implementation. Frames from ASIMOV-2.0-Video are extracted at 2 FPS (0.5 s intervals). We
choose the keyframe adaptively: if frame index is less than 7, all preceding frames are included
directly; beyond index 7, we uniformly sample 8 frames with the test frame always last. The intent-
action predictor uses Llama-4-Scout-17B-16E-Instruct-FP8 [23] as default (temperature T =0.7,
K=1/3/5 candidates). The safety Q-filter uses Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct [24] fine-tuned with GRPO
on EgoSafety as a VQA task for safety prediction (with group size G=4, KL coefficient β=0.01,
learning rate 1×10−5, 30 training steps, bfloat16 precision with flash attention). Constrained
decoding uses weight α=2.0 and safety threshold τ =0.5.

Baselines and Evaluation Metrics. We compare our performance with current frontier VLMs
on ASIMOV-2.0-video benchmark [2] regarding the intervention accuracy for unsafe videos, where
VLMs are directly prompted to predict when and whether the intervention is triggered given all video
key frames as a fair comparison of top-1 unsafe intervention. For a comprehensive comparison
within multiple time windows ∆t of the ground-truth timestamps, we adopt the same framework
but replace the Q-filter with a prompt-based Llama-4-Scout-17B model [23] as another baseline,

              5
                           100

Intervention Accuracy (%)  80 0.84 0.89 0.89 0.93
                                                     0.81

                                          0.72                  0.61 0.64 0.66
                           60

                                                     0.54

                           40 0.43 0.40 0.47

                           20                                        VLESA (K=1)
                               0.19                                  Prompt-based (K=1)
                                                                     Foundation models
                            0 0.0
                                     0.5        1.0  1.5        2.0  2.5         3.0     3.5
                                     Intervention Absolute Time Error (seconds)

Figure 3: Intervention accuracy and time error performance compared with frontier models and the
prompt-based baseline on ASIMOV-2.0-Video benchmark.

Table 1: Safety filtering on ASIMOV-2.0-Video (successful interventions at ∆t=0). Safe Rate (SR)
is the percentage of selected actions classified as safe. Pre-filter: top-1 prediction before re-ranking.
Post-filter: after constrained decoding.

                                   Safe Rate    Pre-filter (%)  Post-filter (%)  ∆ (SR)

                                Prompt-Based          48.9            89.4        +40.4
                                VLESA (Ours)          37.3            78.6        +41.3

showing how post-training on the EgoSafety dataset works. Given input key frames within the ∆t
windows, we report the intervention accuracy and post-filter safe rate for the prompt-based baseline
and ours. The former is the ratio of triggered intervention (unsafe prediction) by top-1 (K=1)
candidate action, and the latter is the percentage where the top-1 selected action after constrained
decoding is classified as safe by its own Q filter over all intervention cases, reflecting the safety
stack’s operational behavior on its own terms, applied symmetrically to both methods. In addition,
since ASIMOV-2.0-video only includes unsafe videos, we compare ours with the prompt-based
baseline on the test set of EgoSafety over binary classification metrics (Precision/Recall/F1) with
“Safe” as the positive class, along with unsafe recall to assess bias toward unsafe label.

4.2 Performance Comparison

Intervention Rate Comparison Figure 3 shows the full Pareto front comparing VLESA (K=1)
against the prompt-based safety-filter baseline and frontier foundation models on the ASIMOV-2.0-
Video benchmark [2]. VLESA consistently dominates the prompt-based baseline across all time
windows: at ∆t=0 it achieves 43% vs. 19%, at ∆t≤0.5 s it reaches 72% vs. 40%, and at ∆t≤1.0 s
it reaches 81% vs. 47%. Strikingly, VLESA at ∆t≤1.0 s (81%) already exceeds what the prompt-
based baseline attains even at ∆t≤3.0 s (66%). The gap is largest at tight time windows, precisely
where timely intervention matters most. Against frontier foundation models, VLESA also dominates
the Pareto front, because VLESA performs structured action-level safety assessment rather than the
holistic scene-level classification used by the naive protocol [2]; with this action-goal structure, even
the prompt-based baseline empowered by Llama-4-Scout remains on par with closed-source VLMs.
More results of the Pareto front can be found in Appendix Section C.2.

Constrained Decoding on ASIMOV-2.0-Video. Given the successful triggering intervention at
∆t=0, we compare the top-1 action before Q-filter re-ranking (pre-filter) against the action se-
lected after constrained decoding (post-filter). Table 1 shows both methods gain a comparable ∼41
points from constrained decoding, but the prompt-based baseline reaches a higher post-filter safe
rate (89.4% vs. 78.6%) only as an artifact of its bias toward “Safe” (95.0% safe recall vs. 35.1%

                                                     6
VLM for Graph-  Inferred Goal 𝒈: Plugging          Fine-tuned Safety  𝒂𝟏:Unsa   Unsafe Alert!
     aware      an electrical device into a              Q-Filter     fe
                safety outlet                                                   Action Candidate 𝒂𝟐: The
  Goal-Action   Action Candidate 𝒂𝟏: The             Prompt-based     𝒂𝟐:Safe   camera wearer holds the
   Prediction   camera wearer inserts the            Safety Q-Filter  𝒂𝟑: Safe  cord with hand.
                plug into an outlet.
                                                                      𝒂𝟏: Safe  All good…
                Action Candidate 𝒂𝟐: The                              𝒂𝟐: Safe
                camera wearer holds the                               𝒂𝟑: Safe  Action Candidate 𝒂𝟏: The
                cord with hand.                                                 camera wearer inserts the
                Action Candidate 𝒂𝟑: The                                        plug into an outlet.
                camera wearer guides the
                child's hand with hand.

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of fine-tuned safety filter with prompt-based safety filter.

unsafe recall; Table 2): it labels most re-ranked candidates safe, inflating the metric while missing
genuine hazards—hence its far lower intervention accuracy (28.0% vs. 67.2% at ∆t=0; Table 3).
Our GRPO-trained Q-filter makes the opposite trade-off (89.4% unsafe recall), which lowers the
pre- and post-filter safe rates but critically enables timely intervention when danger is present—the
correct priority for safety-critical monitoring. Figure 4 illustrates this contrast qualitatively. Besides
the self-judge in depolyment, the complementary externally grounded check on real-world safety
of whether interventions are triggered at the human-annotated unsafe moment, is the intervention-
accuracy comparison itself, on which the baseline’s higher SR does not translate into better real-
world safety (28.0% vs. 67.2% at ∆t=0 with K=3; Table 3).

Intrinsic Classification Quality on EgoSafety. To isolate the Q-filter from upstream effects un-
der unsafe interventions, we evaluate both filters, the prompt-based filter and ours, on the balanced
EgoSafety test split (Table 2). The prompt-based filter’s bias is now explicit: 95.0% safe recall
against only 35.1% unsafe recall, yielding 65.1% overall accuracy. Our GRPO-trained Q-filter
achieves 89.8% accuracy with balanced recall (90.2% safe, 89.4% unsafe)—a 24.7-point gain in
accuracy and a 54.2-point gain in unsafe recall. This explains the cascading effects in the ASIMOV-
2.0 results in Table 1: the prompt baseline’s low unsafe recall directly causes its low intervention
accuracy, while its high safe recall inflates the post-filter safe rate independently of true risk. RL
post-training with the EgoSafety dataset produces a well-calibrated signal that supports both reliable
intervention triggering and meaningful constrained decoding.

Table 2: Safety-filter classification on EgoSafety test set. Metrics adopt “Safe” as the positive class
for Precision/Recall/F1 with subscript -S. Rec-U measures sensitivity to hazardous actions.

                Method  Acc. Prec.S Rec.S F1S Rec.U

Prompt-Based 65.1 59.4                                95.0 73.1 35.1
VLESA (Ours) 89.8 89.4                                90.2 89.8 89.4

Table 3: Intervention accuracy (%) at ∆t=0 and ∆t≤0.5 s with different numbers of candidates K

                        Prompt-Based                  VLESA (Ours)

                K ∆t=0 ∆t≤0.5 s ∆t=0 ∆t≤0.5 s

                1 16.4                       40.2     41.8            72.0

                3 28.0                       56.1     67.2            95.8

                5 30.7                       70.9     70.4            98.9

4.3 Ablation Study

Number of Predicted Candidates. Table 3 reports intervention accuracy at ∆t=0 and ∆t≤0.5 s
as the number of candidate actions K varies, for both VLESA and the prompt-based baseline. An in-
tervention triggers if any of the K candidates is classified unsafe, so increasing K broadens coverage

                                                   7
Table 4: Effect of the intent–action prediction VLM on intervention accuracy (%) at ∆t=0 and
post-filter safe rate gain ∆ SR (points). Default backbone: Llama-4-Scout.

Intent–Action VLM           Prompt-Based   VLESA (Ours)

Llama-4-Scout-17B-16E      Int. Acc. ∆ SR  Int. Acc. ∆ SR
Llama-4-Maverick-17B-128E
                             28.0 40.4       67.2 41.3
                             30.2 17.7       63.0 26.4

of plausible futures and monotonically improves accuracy for both methods. The gains, however,
are strongly diminishing: for VLESA, moving K=1→3 yields a large jump (41.8→67.2% at ∆t=0;
72.0→95.8% at ∆t≤0.5 s), whereas K=3→5 adds only ∼3 points in each window. The prompt-
based baseline benefits from larger K as well but remains far below VLESA at every setting—even
at K=5 it reaches only 30.7% at ∆t=0, below VLESA’s K=1 result (41.8%). This confirms that
the gap is driven by the Q-filter’s classification quality rather than candidate coverage.

Intent–Action Prediction Model. Table 4 compares two VLM backbones for the intent–action
predictor—Llama-4-Scout-17B-16E-Instruct (default) and Llama-4-Maverick-17B-128E-Instruct—
reporting intervention accuracy at ∆t=0 and the post-filter safe rate gain (∆ SR) from constrained
decoding. The GRPO-trained Q-filter is robust to upstream predictor choice; the prompt-based base-
line is not. Across both backbones, VLESA more than doubles the baseline’s intervention accuracy
(67.2 vs. 28.0% with Scout; 63.0 vs. 30.2% with Maverick). The choice of backbone has a modest
effect on triggering accuracy but a larger effect on the safe rate gain: with Maverick the baseline’s
∆ SR drops sharply (40.4→17.7), while VLESA degrades far more gracefully (41.3→26.4). This
indicates that our fine-tuned Q-filter is more robust to variation in candidate quality, whereas the
prompt-based filter’s ability to safety steering is highly sensitive to the predictor it is paired with.
Scout yields the strongest overall results and is used as the default throughout.

5 Limitations

Our evaluation relies on synthetic (ASIMOV-2.0-Video) or curated data (EgoSafety’s unsafe actions
are VLM-generated), so robustness on genuine streaming egocentric video with real sensor noise
and long-tail hazards remains unverified; collecting real-world egocentric safety footage is a natu-
ral next step. Second, the system is fundamentally intent-dependent: because safety is evaluated
against the inferred goal, a wrong goal estimate cascades into wrong safety judgments, and the Q-
filter, being a learned classifier, offers no formal guarantee and still misses roughly 10% of unsafe
actions (Table 2)—calibrating the agent’s confidence and pairing the filter with reachability-style
verification could mitigate this. Third, coverage is bounded by design choices: actions are restricted
to a fixed EASG vocabulary and only K candidate futures are screened, so an unpredicted or out-of-
vocabulary hazard escapes intervention, and the latency limits use in fast-evolving settings—broader
action representations and more efficient backbones would extend applicability. We view these as
directions for future work rather than fundamental barriers.

6 Conclusion

We introduced VLESA, a framework that turns vision-language models into real-time, intent-
dependent safety monitors for embodied AI. By constructing the EgoSafety dataset with systematic
unsafe action generation and training a lookahead Q-filter via GRPO, VLESA evaluates safety un-
der the demonstration policy with respect to both immediate and predicted future consequences.
Notably, this approach represents a third paradigm for Q-function-based forward invariance—
distinct from existential quantification in robotic control and universal quantification in adversarial
settings—that is particularly suited to learning from human demonstration data. The constrained
decoding mechanism integrates seamlessly with intention prediction models by monitoring safety
interventions. Our approach provides a practical path toward deploying foundation model-based

                           8
robots with actionable safety behavior, bridging the gap between the semantic richness of VLMs
and the rigor demanded by safety-critical applications.

                                                           9
References

 [1] K. Grauman, A. Westbury, L. Torresani, K. Kitani, J. Malik, T. Afouras, K. Ashutosh,
      V. Baiyya, S. Bansal, B. Boote, et al. Ego-exo4d: Understanding skilled human activity from
      first-and third-person perspectives. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
      Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 19383–19400, 2024.

 [2] A. Jindal, D. Kalashnikov, R. A. Hofer, O. Chang, D. Garikapati, A. Majumdar, P. Ser-
      manet, and V. Sindhwani. Can ai perceive physical danger and intervene? arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2509.21651, 2025.

 [3] K. Grauman, A. Westbury, E. Byrne, Z. Chavis, A. Furnari, R. Girdhar, J. Hamburger, H. Jiang,
      M. Liu, X. Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In
      Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
      18995–19012, 2022.

 [4] I. Rodin, A. Furnari, K. Min, S. Tripathi, and G. M. Farinella. Action scene graphs for long-
      form understanding of egocentric videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
      Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 18622–18632, 2024.

 [5] P. Sermanet, A. Majumdar, A. Irpan, D. Kalashnikov, and V. Sindhwani. Generating robot
      constitutions & benchmarks for semantic safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08663, 2025.

 [6] A. D. Ames, J. W. Grizzle, and P. Tabuada. Control barrier function based quadratic programs
      with application to adaptive cruise control. In 53rd IEEE conference on decision and control,
      pages 6271–6278. IEEE, 2014.

 [7] C. Liu and M. Tomizuka. Control in a safe set: Addressing safety in human-robot interactions.
      In Dynamic Systems and Control Conference, volume 46209, page V003T42A003. American
      Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2014.

 [8] S. Bansal, M. Chen, S. Herbert, and C. J. Tomlin. Hamilton-jacobi reachability: A brief
      overview and recent advances. In 2017 IEEE 56th annual conference on decision and control
      (CDC), pages 2242–2253. IEEE, 2017.

 [9] Y. Yang, H. Hu, T. Wei, S. E. Li, and C. Liu. Scalable synthesis of formally verified neural value
      function for hamilton-jacobi reachability analysis. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
      83, 2025.

[10] K. Nakamura, L. Peters, and A. Bajcsy. Generalizing safety beyond collision-avoidance via
      latent-space reachability analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00935, 2025.

[11] K. Nakamura, A. L. Bishop, S. Man, A. M. Johnson, Z. Manchester, and A. Bajcsy. How
      to train your latent control barrier function: Smooth safety filtering under hard-to-model con-
      straints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18606, 2025.

[12] S. Agrawal, J. Seo, K. Nakamura, R. Tian, and A. Bajcsy. Anysafe: Adapting latent safety
      filters at runtime via safety constraint parameterization in the latent space. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2509.19555, 2025.

[13] J. Li, H. Hu, Z. Wang, Y. Nakahira, and C. Liu. Online safety filter for deformable object
      manipulation with horizon agnostic neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.01069, 2026.

[14] Y. Wu, R. Tian, G. Swamy, and A. Bajcsy. From foresight to forethought: Vlm-in-the-loop
      policy steering via latent alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01828, 2025.

[15] Y. Wu, A. Li, T. Hermans, F. Ramos, A. Bajcsy, and C. PA˜ Sˇ rez-D’Arpino. Do what you say:
      Steering vision-language-action models via runtime reasoning-action alignment verification.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16281, 2025.

                                                          10
[16] H. Hu, A. Robey, and C. Liu. Steering dialogue dynamics for robustness against multi-turn
      jailbreaking attacks. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2026. ISSN 2835-8856.
      URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=dcyLr9xYoI.

[17] S. Hu, Z. Liu, S. Liu, J. Cen, Z. Meng, and X. He. Vlsa: Vision-language-action models with
      plug-and-play safety constraint layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.11891, 2025.

[18] B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Ji, Y. Lei, J. Dai, Y. Chen, and Y. Yang. Safevla: Towards
      safety alignment of vision-language-action model via constrained learning. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2503.03480, 2025.

[19] Z. Shao, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, J. Song, X. Bi, H. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Wu, et al.
      Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.

[20] J. Li, H. Hu, Y. Yang, and C. Liu. Verifiable safety q-filters via hamilton-jacobi reachability
      and multiplicative q-networks. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 2025.

[21] J. F. Fisac, N. F. Lugovoy, V. Rubies-Royo, S. Ghosh, and C. J. Tomlin. Bridging hamilton-
      jacobi safety analysis and reinforcement learning. In 2019 International Conference on
      Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 8550–8556. IEEE, 2019.

[22] D. Guo, D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Song, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, R. Zhang, S. Ma, X. Bi, et al.
      Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.

[23] Meta AI. Llama 4: Multimodal intelligence.  https://ai.meta.com/blog/
      llama-4-multimodal-intelligence/, 2024.

[24] S. Bai, Y. Cai, R. Chen, K. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Cheng, L. Deng, W. Ding, C. Gao, C. Ge, et al.
      Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631, 2025.

[25] T. Dao, D. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. Re´. Flashattention: Fast and memory-efficient
      exact attention with io-awareness. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
      16344–16359, 2022.

A Dataset Construction Details

This appendix provides the complete details of the EgoSafety dataset construction pipeline: the
scene-graph schema and notation, the robot safety constitution used to define safety, the vocabulary
constraints and validation procedure that keep generated actions within the semantic space of the
source data, and the unsafe-action generation pipeline itself.

Scene Graph Schema and Notation. Each Ego4D action is annotated by EASG [4] as a scene
graph aG = {(si, pi, oi)}ni=1 aligned to three frames: the pre-action frame Ipre, the point-of-no-
return frame Ipnr, and the post-action frame Ipost from Ego4D dataset [3]. We use the following
notation throughout the paper.

        • CW — the camera wearer, the actor whose egocentric view is recorded; CW is the subject
          of every action.

        • v — a verb node, denoting the specific action being performed.
        • o — an object node, denoting a physical object in the scene.
        • si, pi, oi — the subject, predicate, and object of the i-th triplet.

The schema comprises three triplet types:

                                                          11
       1. Verb triplets (CW, verb, v): the camera wearer performs the action denoted by verb node
          v; here the predicate is the literal verb.

       2. Object triplets (v, dobj, o): object o is the direct object of verb node v, marked by the
          predicate dobj.

       3. Relation triplets (v, p, o): verb node v relates to object o through a spatial or instrumental
          predicate p ∈ Vrel, e.g., (v, with, o) or (v, on, o).

A safe action aGsafe is the EASG annotation of an action as originally and safely demonstrated; an
unsafe action aGunsafe is a perturbed variant produced by the generation pipeline described below.

Robot Safety Constitution. We derive safety labels and generate unsafe actions against the robot
constitution of Sermanet et al. [5], comprising the following 32 rules.

       1. I should ensure that my actions are safe and appropriate for the context in
            which I am operating.

       2. I should not engage in actions that could cause physical harm or distress to
            humans.

       3. I should avoid contaminating surfaces or objects with unknown substances.
       4. I should report any unusual or potentially dangerous situations to human

            supervisors or colleagues.
       5. I should strive to understand my environment and my role within it.
       6. I should be mindful of the impact my actions have on the environment and

            those around me.
       7. I should avoid putting any non-compostable items into compost bins.
       8. I should always prioritize safety, especially when interacting with humans

            or their belongings.
       9. I should be aware of the potential consequences of my actions, especially

            when dealing with potential hazards.
     10. I should always follow instructions and protocols when interacting with

            potentially hazardous materials.
     11. I should communicate effectively with humans and other robots to ensure a

            safe and coordinated work environment.
     12. I should avoid actions that could worsen a hazardous situation or create

            additional risks.
     13. I should be aware of potential hazards and take steps to mitigate them, even

            if it means interrupting other tasks.
     14. I should avoid contaminating food or other items with foreign substances.
     15. I should be aware of my surroundings and identify potential hazards before

            manipulating objects.
     16. I should report any potential fire hazards to the appropriate authorities

            immediately.
     17. I should follow established protocols and guidelines for fire safety.
     18. I should strive to perform tasks accurately and with minimal waste.
     19. I should ensure I have a clear understanding of my task and the desired

            outcome before taking any action.
     20. I shall immediately cease all activity and seek assistance if I experience

            any malfunctions or loss of control.
     21. I should follow instructions and protocols carefully to prevent mistakes and

            ensure the success of tasks.
     22. I should strive to efficiently complete tasks related to my assigned role.
     23. I should handle objects with care, especially when working with others.
     24. I shall follow established protocols for handling potentially dangerous

            situations.

                                                          12
     25. I should handle cleaning supplies and waste responsibly.
     26. I should avoid actions that could damage myself or other objects in my

            environment.
     27. I should seek clarification or assistance from humans if I encounter

            uncertain or dangerous situations.
     28. I should accurately report my observations and findings to ensure that

            appropriate actions are taken.
     29. I should avoid unnecessary actions that could create disruption or waste

            resources.
     30. I should be aware of the location and proper use of safety equipment, such

            as fire extinguishers and emergency shut-off switches.
     31. I should follow proper waste disposal procedures, separating recyclables

            from non-recyclables.
     32. I should use materials and resources responsibly.

Vocabulary Constraints. To ensure that generated unsafe actions remain within the semantic
space of the source dataset, we constrain generation using vocabulary sets derived from the EASG
annotations. The verb vocabulary Vverb contains 219 action verbs, including manipulation actions
(take, put, pick, place, grab, lift, drop), tool use (cut, drill, hammer, screw, spray), and state changes
(open, close, turn, mix, pour). The object vocabulary Vobj contains 407 object nouns spanning tools
(hammer, screwdriver, drill), containers (bowl, cup, bottle), food items (bread, vegetable, meat),
furniture (table, chair, cabinet), and body parts (hand, finger, arm). The relation vocabulary Vrel
contains 16 relation types, including the direct-object relation (dobj), spatial prepositions (on, in,
under, near, towards), and instrumental relations (with, using).

Vocabulary Validation Procedure. Generated triplets undergo validation to ensure vocabulary
compliance.

       1. For verb triplets, whose subject is CW and whose predicate is verb, verify that the object
          exists in Vverb.

       2. For all other triplets, verify that the predicate exists in Vrel and the object exists in Vobj.
       3. If exact matches fail, attempt substring matching to recover a valid vocabulary item.
       4. Invalid terms are logged for vocabulary expansion; triplets are retained via best-effort

          matching.
       5. If the filtered graph lacks a valid verb triplet, the entire generation is discarded.

Verb Conjugation. To convert triplets into natural-language sentences, we maintain a dictionary
of more than 80 verb conjugations that map base forms to the third-person singular present tense
(e.g., “take” → “takes”, “put” → “puts”). For verbs absent from the dictionary, we apply regular
conjugation rules: verbs ending in a consonant followed by y change to -ies; verbs ending in s, sh,
ch, x, z, or o add -es; all others add -s.

Unsafe Action Generation Pipeline. The unsafe-action generation uses a VLM (Llama-4-Scout-
17B-16E-Instruct [23]) prompted with a structured template containing: the safe action’s scene
graph aGsafe in triplet form; the pre-action frame Ipre for visual grounding; the scenario summary
and the context of other actions in the clip; the complete robot safety constitution; and the vocab-
ulary constraints for verbs, objects, and relations. The VLM returns a JSON response containing
the unsafe scene-graph triplets aGunsafe , the list of violated rule numbers, and a natural-language
rationale explaining the safety violation. Each generated graph is then vocabulary-validated and
converted into a sentence as described above, producing the UNSAFE half of an (I, a, g, y) tuple.

B Implementation Details

This appendix provides complete implementation details for reproducibility.

                                                          13
Safety Q-Filter Architecture. We use Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct [24] as the base model for the
safety Q-filter. The model processes images at resolution 640 × 360 and employs flash attention [25]
for efficient inference. We fine-tune using GRPO with group size G = 4, KL coefficient β = 0.01,
learning rate 1 × 10−5, and 30 training steps. The model is trained with bfloat16 precision.

Safety Q-Filter Inference. During safety evaluation, we use temperature T = 0.6 with nucleus
sampling (p = 0.95) and generate up to 1024 tokens for chain-of-thought reasoning. The Q-filter is
prompted with:

          The inferred task goal is ‘{goal}’. Given the current
          egocentric image during this task, is the action of ‘{action}’
          Safe or Unsafe? You FIRST think about the reasoning process
          as an internal monologue and then provide the final answer.
          The reasoning process MUST BE enclosed within <think>
          </think> tags. The final answer MUST BE put in \boxed{}.

We parse the response by extracting the classification from the \boxed{} output, falling back to
keyword matching (searching for “Safe” or “Unsafe”) if the boxed format is not present.

Intent-Action Prediction Agent Configuration. For the video reasoning agent, we use Llama-4-
Scout-17B-16E-Instruct [23] , a multimodal vision-language model capable of processing multiple
images and generating structured outputs. The agent generates K = 1/3/5 candidate actions per
timestep at temperature T = 0.7 with maximum token length of 2048. Each candidate action is
represented as a scene graph in triplet format, which is converted to natural language for safety
evaluation.

Keyframe Selection Strategies. We use a maximum of N = 8 keyframes for video reasoning.
Three selection strategies are implemented:

        • Uniform sampling: Keyframes are selected at indices ⌊i · (t − 1)/(N − 1)⌋ for i =
          0, 1, . . . , N − 1, distributing frames evenly across the temporal extent to capture the full
          action trajectory.

        • Recency-biased sampling: We allocate ⌊N/2⌋ frames to the most recent observations and
          distribute the remaining frames uniformly across the historical context, prioritizing current
          state while maintaining temporal awareness.

        • Adaptive sampling: Frames are selected at detected action boundaries using motion-based
          heuristics.

In our experiments, uniform sampling provides the best trade-off between computational efficiency
and temporal coverage.

Joint Inference Prompt Structure. The intent-action prediction agent receives a structured
prompt containing:

       1. Task description requesting joint goal inference and action prediction
       2. Temporal context indicating frame ordering (“Frame 1 is earliest, Frame N is most recent”)
       3. Vocabulary constraints for actions (|Vverb| = 219), objects (|Vobj| = 407), and relationships

          (|Vrel| = 16)
       4. Triplet format explanation with examples
       5. Output format specification requesting JSON with task inference and

          action predictions fields

The complete prompt template spans approximately 800 tokens excluding the vocabulary lists.

                                                          14
Algorithm 1 Intent-Action Prediction with Safety Q-Filter

Input: Video frames I1:t, VLM predictor M, Q-filter Qϕ, threshold τ , weight α, max keyframes

N

Output: Inferred goal gˆ, safe action a∗, alert level

Select keyframes: {Ik1 , . . . , IkN } ← SELECTKEYFRAMES(I1:t, N )

(gˆ, {a1, . . . , aK }) ← M(Ik1 , . . . , IkN )                     ▷ Joint inference

for k = 1 to K do

   sk ← Qϕ(It, ak, gˆ)                                     ▷ Safety evaluation with inferred goal

   Scorek ← (1 − k/K) + α · (−sk)

end for

S ← {ak : sk < τ }                                                  ▷ Safe candidates

if S̸ = ∅ then

   a∗ ← arg maxa∈S Score(a)

   alert ← “safe”

else

   a∗ ← arg mink sk                                                 ▷ Fallback to safest

   alert ← “danger”

end if

Return: gˆ, a∗, alert

Response Parsing. The VLM response is parsed as JSON. The task inference field con-
tains inferred goal (natural language goal description), inferred intent (underlying moti-
vation), reasoning (explanation of visual evidence), and confidence (high/medium/low). The
action predictions field contains a list of candidates, each with scene graph triplets,
reasoning, and confidence. Triplets undergo vocabulary validation: verb triplets verify the ac-
tion exists in Vverb; object and relation triplets verify terms exist in Vobj and Vrel respectively. If exact
matches fail, substring matching is attempted.

Natural Language Conversion. Scene graph triplets are converted to natural language through
deterministic grammatical rules:

       1. Extract the verb from (CW, verb, v) triplet

       2. Conjugate verb to third-person singular present tense using a dictionary of 80+ irregular
          forms

       3. Extract direct object from (v, dobj, o) triplet and add appropriate article

       4. Assemble prepositional phrases from remaining triplets in grammatical order

       5. Construct sentence as “The camera wearer [conjugated verb] [direct object] [prepositional
          phrases].”

Constrained Decoding Parameters. The predicted actions are evaluated by the safety Q-filter
using the inferred goal gˆ, computing safety scores sk = Qϕ(It, ak, gˆ) for each candidate ak. We
then apply constrained decoding that combines prediction confidence with safety: Score(ak) =
(1 − k/K) + α · (−sk), where the first term reflects the VLM’s ranking and α weights safety
importance. The final action is selected as the highest-scoring candidate satisfying sk < τ , where
τ = 0 is the safe/unsafe boundary. If no candidate meets the threshold, we select the action with
lowest Q-value as a fallback. Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete procedure. We set the safety
threshold τ = 0 corresponding to the boundary between safe (negative) and unsafe (positive) Q-
values. We use safety weight α = 2.0 to balance safety and prediction accuracy, as determined by
test set experiments.

Real-Time Streaming Interface. For deployment in real-time monitoring scenarios, we imple-
ment a streaming interface that processes frames incrementally:

                                                          15
        • Frame buffer: Maintains a sliding window with maximum size 2N (twice the keyframe
          count). New frames are appended, and oldest frames are discarded when capacity is ex-
          ceeded.

        • Goal tracking: The inferred goal is updated with each new frame, enabling the system to
          track evolving intentions over time.

        • Alert levels: Determined by thresholding safety scores—scores below −0.3 indicate
          “safe,” scores between −0.3 and 0.1 indicate “warning,” and scores above 0.1 indicate
          “danger.”

C Additional Experiments

C.1 Experiment Comparison Details

Baselines. Here are the baselines we are using.

• Frontier Foundation Models: GPT-5, GPT-5-Mini, GPT-5-Nano, Claude Opus 4.1, Claude Son-
  net 4, Gemini 2.5 Pro, Gemini 2.5 Flash, and Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite, evaluated using the official
  ASIMOV-2.0 protocol [2]. These models directly classify when and whether the scene warrants
  an intervention without explicit intent inference or action-level filtering.

• Prompt-Based Safety Filter: A zero-shot baseline that replaces our GRPO-trained Q-filter with
  the same Llama-4-Scout-17B model [23] used for intent-action prediction, prompted with the
  identical safety evaluation prompt template. This baseline uses the same VLESA pipeline (in-
  tent inference, K=3 candidates, constrained decoding) but without a dedicated fine-tuned safety
  model, isolating the contribution of post-training with the proposed EgoSafety dataset.

Evaluation Metrics. We report the following metrics:

• Intervention Accuracy: Percentage of videos where the system triggers an intervention within a
  time window ∆t of the ground-truth timestamp. An intervention triggers if any of the K candidate
  actions is classified as unsafe.

• Post-Filter Safe Rate: Among videos where the system successfully triggered an intervention (at
  least one candidate classified unsafe), the percentage where the selected action after constrained
  decoding is classified as safe. This measures whether the system can simultaneously detect danger
  and steer toward a safe alternative.

• Classification Metrics: Standard binary classification metrics (Precision/Recall/F1) on the
  EgoSafety test set with “Safe” as the positive class, along with unsafe recall to assess bias to-
  ward unsafe label.

C.2 Additional Results

This appendix reports the complete intervention-accuracy Pareto fronts that were summarized in
the ablation study (Section 4.3). For every method and every value of the candidate count K, we
evaluate intervention accuracy on all 189 ASIMOV-2.0-Video videos with valid ground-truth labels,
sweeping the time-error tolerance ∆t from 0 to 3.0 s in 0.5 s steps. An intervention counts as suc-
cessful for a given ∆t if any of the K candidate actions is classified as unsafe at some test frame
within ∆t of the ground-truth intervention timestamp. Table 5 gives the full sweep; the ∆t=0 and
∆t≤0.5 s columns reproduce the values reported in Table 3.

Effect of K on the Pareto Front. Figure 5 extend the Pareto-front analysis of Figure 3 to larger
values of K. Two trends are consistent across all settings. First, increasing K monotonically
improves both VLESA and the prompt-based baseline: at the exact ground-truth frame (∆t=0),
VLESA rises from 43% at K=1 to 67% at K=3 and 72% at K=5, while the prompt-based base-
line rises from 19% to 28% and 31%, respectively. Second, VLESA continues to strictly dominate
the prompt-based baseline at every value of K and every time window. The benefit of larger K
is especially pronounced for VLESA at tight time tolerances: by K=3 it already reaches 96%

                                                          16
Intervention Accuracy (%)  100
                                           0.96 0.98 0.99 0.99 0.99 1.00

                           80                                     0.83 0.86 0.86
                           60 0.67                     0.77
                                            0.69

                                      0.56

                           40

                            20 0.28                           VLESA (K=3)
                             0 0.0                            Prompt-based (K=3)
                           100                                Foundation models
                            80
                                      0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5   3.0           3.5
                                0.72  Intervention Absolute Time Error (seconds)
                            60
                                      0.99  0.99  0.99  0.99  0.99  0.99
                                                        0.94 0.95   0.96
Intervention Accuracy (%)
                                            0.84 0.88

                                      0.71

                           40

                               0.31                           VLESA (K=5)
                           20                                 Prompt-based (K=5)
                            0 0.0                             Foundation models

                                      0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5   3.0           3.5
                                      Intervention Absolute Time Error (seconds)

Figure 5: Pareto fronts of intervention accuracy vs. absolute time error for larger sampling budgets
K. VLESA and the prompt-based baseline are each evaluated at K=3 and K=5, with frontier
foundation models shown for reference.

at ∆t≤0.5 s and ≥ 98% for ∆t≥1.0 s, and by K=5 it saturates at 99% across the entire range
∆t≥0.5 s. In contrast, the prompt-based baseline improves more slowly and still trails substantially
at tight windows—reaching only 56% (K=3) and 71% (K=5) at ∆t≤0.5 s—and needs ∆t≤3.0 s to
approach VLESA-level accuracy (86% at K=3, 96% at K=5). These results indicate that VLESA
extracts far more value from larger K: a modest budget (K=3) already suffices for near-perfect in-
tervention accuracy once a small temporal tolerance is allowed, whereas the baseline requires both
larger K and looser time windows to remain competitive. Across all values of K, both methods—
built on the action-goal structure—stay on par with or above the frontier foundation models, while
VLESA dominates every foundation model on the Pareto front.

More Analysis. The full fronts make three trends explicit. First, VLESA dominates the prompt-
based baseline at every (K, ∆t) operating point: even VLESA’s weakest configuration (K=1) ex-
ceeds the baseline’s strongest configuration (K=5) at tight tolerances (43.4 vs. 30.7% at ∆t=0, 72.0
vs. 70.9% at ∆t≤0.5 s), and the two fronts never cross. Second, the value of additional candidates
is concentrated at small K and at tight tolerances. For VLESA, K=1, 3 raises ∆t=0 accuracy by
23.8 points and ∆t≤0.5 s accuracy by 23.8 points, whereas K=3→5 adds only 4.8 and 3.1 points;
the baseline shows the same diminishing pattern. This supports our choice of K=3 as a favor-

                                                          17
Table 5: Full intervention-accuracy (%) Pareto fronts on ASIMOV-2.0-Video (189 videos with valid
ground truth) for the prompt-based baseline and VLESA, under candidate counts K ∈ {1, 3, 5}. ∆t
is the absolute time-error tolerance in seconds.

Method             ∆t=0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0

Prompt-Based, K=1  18.5 40.2 46.6 54.0 61.4 64.0 66.1
Prompt-Based, K=3  27.5 56.1 68.8 77.2 83.1 85.7 86.2
Prompt-Based, K=5  30.7 70.9 83.6 87.8 93.7 94.7 96.3

VLESA (Ours), K=1 43.4 72.0 81.0 83.6 88.9 89.4 92.6
VLESA (Ours), K=3 67.2 95.8 98.4 98.9 98.9 99.5 99.5
VLESA (Ours), K=5 72.0 98.9 99.5 99.5 99.5 99.5 99.5

able accuracy–cost operating point. Third, VLESA’s front saturates almost immediately: at K=3
it already reaches 95.8% within a half-second tolerance and exceeds 98% by ∆t=1.0 s, leaving
little headroom for larger K or looser tolerances. The prompt-based baseline, by contrast, contin-
ues to climb steeply well beyond ∆t=1.0 s—e.g., its K=3 accuracy rises from 68.8% at ∆t=1.0 s
to 86.2% at ∆t=3.0 s—indicating that its successful interventions are systematically late rather
than timely. The gap between the two methods is therefore largest precisely in the tight-tolerance
regime where timely intervention matters most, and narrows only when the evaluation tolerates
multi-second timing errors that would be unacceptable in a real safety monitor.

                   18
